
Title
Quantifying Co-evolution in Urban Systems with Transfer Entropy

Abstract
Understanding urban systems, either from a theoretical viewpoint or for practical sustainable
planning applications, often implies intricate dynamics, that can be in some cases with circular
causalities between populations of agents or objects, be coined as co-evolution [1]. In particular,
the co-evolution between transportation networks and land-use remains quite unknown, despite
direct usefulness regarding several Sustainable Development Goals (better accessibility,
decarbonised transport, limited urban sprawl). A method to characterise co-evolution, and more
generally the structure of the causal graph between the considered urban system variables, and to
establish causality regimes either in empirical data or across the parameter space of a simulation
model, has been proposed [2], based on Granger causalities. This contribution investigates how the
method can be extended and refined with Transfer Entropy (TE), which provides a more robust and
non-linear measure of causality. Given two or more time-series of urban dynamics, observed on a
population of objects, Effective Transfer Entropy between all directional couples of variables are
estimated on the ensemble (Kraskov estimator implemented in the jidt Java library). We test the
method on a stylised yet rich model of urban morphogenesis [3], which simulates settlement and
network growth simultaneously, with weight parameters balancing between the explaining factors
of future urbanisation (among local density, distance to centre, distance to road network) and with a
network growth following a simple connection rule. We compute causalities on the population of
raster cells, and density, distance to centre and distance to roads variables. A first experiment, a grid
exploration of the model parameter space, provide a broad set of causality regimes, with some
illustrated in Fig. 1. The TE method appears more systematic and robust than the previous method,
with some regimes not found significant by lagged correlations before. This confirms that TE is an
appropriate tool to quantify co-evolution in urban systems, to be further tested on more cases.

Keywords
Urban Systems
Co-evolution
Transfer Entropy

Systems theory, information theory, and systems science
Self-organization, pattern formation, and collective behavior

Oral
Lightning Talk
Poster

Online


